Customizing the product
development process
Ultimately, every product development
team needs a specific, often custom,
product development process that is
catered to the needs of the client and skills
of the team. Unfortunately, we cannot tell
you in this book what specific product
development process is needed for your
specific project. This is simply because
every project is unique and requires its own
product development process and its own
project plan.
We can, however, show you how to create,
evaluate, and manage your own custom
product development process and project
plan. This chapter focuses on this.
To be clear, we’ll define the custom product
development process as the set of specific
activities that need to be taken to achieve a
specific set of design outcomes. Further we
define the custom project plan as the
custom product development process with
resources (human, financial, and temporal)
added to activities.
Every project should have at least some
plan — even if that plan is not very
detailed. Whatever level of detail is chosen
for the project plan, the following sections
will guide the team or team leader in
establishing a good plan that is likely to
lead to success.
During development, plans evolve. It is
unrealistic to believe that a plan will first be
set, then followed without adjustment.
Interestingly, having an initial plan in place
when unexpected problems or delays occur
allows the team to know how the plan can
change with minimal impact on the highest
level project objectives.
8.1 Creating a customized
project plan
A customized project plan is (i) specific to
the project at hand, (ii) aligned with the
capabilities of the development team, and
(iii) established according to the client’s
budgetary and time constraints.
The customized plan includes an activity
map (set of design activities, outcomes,
and their relationships) that will transition a
design from its initial state of evolution to
the client-specified final state of evolution.
Ultimately, as the plan evolves over time,
each of these activities and outcomes will
be defined to such a degree that they can
be assigned to an individual or sub team to
complete. The activities will be defined with
sufficient clarity that the assignee can
complete it according to the budget and
schedule for that specific activity.
141
142 CHAPTER 8. CUSTOMIZING THE PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT PROCESS
The following steps can be used to create a
customized product development process
(steps 1–3) and transition that process into
a custom plan (steps 4–6). Each one of the
steps is described in more detail in the
subsequent subsections.
Process for customizing the project plan:
1. Establish the project scope
2. Articulate specific end-of-stage
outcomes
3. Identify specific intermediate design
outcomes
4. Choose design activities that lead to
the outcomes
5. Allocate resources to each design
activity
6. Add time estimates and extract the
project schedule
Step 1: Establish the project scope
As a first step, the project scope should be
established and stated succinctly and
accurately. This must be done early in the
project. The scope will not only guide the
development of the customized project
plan, and it will also guide the product
development team throughout the entire
project. The project scope can be captured
in a project objective statement, which is a
short statement about a project’s top-level
scope, schedule, and resources. A
description of this and a method for
creating one is found in the Development
Reference, under Project Objective
Statement.
An important part of this step is to bracket
the development, which means to
determine which portion of the product’s
evolution your team will be working on. This
is done by (i) understanding the current
state of the design, and (ii) understanding
the required final state of the design. The
current state and the required final state of
the design exist somewhere on the
evolutionary continuum defined by the
stages of product development. Figure 8.1
illustrates this for the human powered drill.
Step 2: Articulate specific end-of-stage
outcomes
Implied in bracketing the development is
the completion of intermediate stages of
development, each of which has a generic
purpose associated with high-level design
outcomes. For manufactured products that
are expected to evolve through the six
stages of development, Tables 4.1, 5.1,
6.1, 7.1, 7.4, and 7.5 provide the generic
high-level purpose.
For each of the stages of development in
the team’s scope, the team should
articulate the specific requirements that will
be needed for approval, the specific tests
that should be carried out, and the required
state of the design at the time of approval.
Articulating these items clarifies the specific
design outcomes that should appear in the
activity map for this specific project. This
part of the customization process caters to
the detailed and specific needs of the
particular product being designed.
For teams working on products they’re
familiar with — such as the team that
annually develops a new mobile phone — it
will be relatively easy to articulate specific
end-of-stage outcomes. This is because of
their familiarity with the unique design
patterns that exist for mobile phone
development, and because they’re likely to
have a general idea for what the product
will become, well before it is developed.
On the other hand, for teams working on
products they’re unfamiliar with, or on
products that have never existed before, it
may not be possible to be highly specific at
the onset of the product development
process. This is because there is still so
much that is unknown about what the
product will become that it’s simply not
possible to be specific. In such cases, it’s
acceptable for the team to start with
generic end-of-stage outcomes, then
update them when specific information
becomes available.
When establishing the needed approvals, it
is useful to evaluate the risks of failing to
successfully meet the end-of-stage
outcomes (such as failing to select a
product architecture that can be
8.1. CREATING A CUSTOMIZED PROJECT PLAN 143
CONCEPT
DEVELOPMENT
SUBSYSTEM
ENGINEERING
SYSTEM
REFINEMENT
OPPORTUNITY
DEVELOPMENT
PRODUCIBILITY
REFINEMENT
POST-RELEASE
REFINEMENT
Scope of Development for
Human Powered Drill
Figure 8.1: Scoped Development
for Human Powered
Water Well Drill
manufactured using the production
resources of the client or its suppliers). For
each of the risks, the team should establish
an approval that will lessen or eliminate the
risk (such as early stage manufacturing
process approval).
Step 3: Identify specific intermediate
design outcomes
The high-level information emerging from
Steps 1 and 2 are useful for uniting the
team, but it provides only minimal direction
on how to proceed through the project.
Step 3 solves this by establishing
intermediate design outcomes (or subgoals)
that if met would result in accomplishing
the specific end-of-stage outcomes. To do
this, the team breaks down each high-level
outcome into smaller more manageable
lower-level outcomes. Decomposition is a
design tool that can help the team through
this step; it is described in the Development
Reference under Decomposition. In the
context of project goals, the team will use
decomposition to ask what lower level
things need to be accomplished in order to
meet the higher level goals?
Step 4: Choose design activities that lead
to the outcomes
For each of the design outcomes resulting
from Step 3, the development team
chooses one or more design activities that
alone or together are likely to result in the
outcome. Many different activities or sets of
activities can potentially result in a desirable
outcome, so the selected activities are not
unique. These activities, together with the
design outcomes resulting from Step 2, can
be arranged into an activity map that
captures their dependency relationships.
For the most part, this portion of the
customization process caters to the specific
skills and preferences of the development
team. Part II of this book (the Development
Reference) provides a collection of
potentially useful design activities.
Step 5: Allocate resources to each design
activity
For each of the selected design activities,
the team allocates human and financial
resources to execute the activity. One or
more members of the product development
team or its contractors is assigned the
responsibility of carrying out the activity
and accomplishing the outcome. Also, a
portion of the overall project budget is
thoughtfully allocated to the activity.
In the context of an activity map, these
resources can be specified in a variety of
ways. For simplicity, we have placed a
name, and dollar amount next to each
arrow in the activity map. For example,
Figure 8.2 shows an activity map for one
high-level activity for a consumer
electronics project.
Step 6: Add time estimates and extract
the project schedule
A realistic estimate of the time it will take to
complete each activity is made according
to the human and financial resources
allocated to it. Any unit of time can be
allocated, but it is important that the same
unit of time is used consistently. Generally,
days and weeks work well for small-scale
projects, and months or quarters work well
for large-scale projects. Once estimates are
made for each activity, the critical path can
be found and the project schedule can be
established. A method for determining the
critical path is found in the Development
Reference under Critical Path Analysis.
* * * * *
144 CHAPTER 8. CUSTOMIZING THE PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT PROCESS
OPPO
DEVELOPMENT
ARCHITECTURE
DEVELOPMENT
SUBSYSTEM
ENGINEERING
SYSTEM
REFINEMENT
PRODUCIBILITY
REFINEMENT
POST RELEASE
REFINEMENT
G
F
C
D
E
4
2
3
1
1
1
1
1
n
7
9
5
5
5
4
4
4
2
2 2
2
3
3
3
3
6
6
6
6
C
C
C
C
A
A
A
A
B
B
B
B
B
D
D
D
E
F
G
8
H
F
n-1
k
k-1 k-2
n-2
D
E
F
2
3
4
5
7
C
E
F
T: 6 Wks
$: 3,400
P: Carl S.
T: 4 Wks
$: 2,000
P: Nichole C.
B3
B4
B5
T: 4 Wks
$: 2,000
P: Elena C.
T: 4 Wks
$: 3,400
P: Derrick
T: 5 Wks
$: 3,600
P: Daniel
T: 4 Wks
$: 4,000
P: William G.
T: 24 Wks
$: 12,000
P: Chris M.
T: 2 Wks
$: 4,500
P: Enan G.
T: 4 Wks
$: 3,700
P: Brian S.
T: 6 Wks
$: 12,000
P: Helaman
T: 7 Wks
$: 3,000
P: Jason
T: 2 Wks
$: 2,000
P: Alex C.
T: 5 Wks
$: 3,900
P: James J.
T: 6 Wks
$: 7,600
P: Carl S.
B8 B11
B10
B12 B13
B14
B9
B6
2
1
B1 Snap Fit Requirements
B2 Snap Fit Model
B3 Plastics Design
B4 Mold Design
B5 Prototype Plastics
B6 Circuit Requirements
B7 FCC Compliance Test Methods
B8 Schematic Design
B9 SPICE Circuit Simulation
B10 Breadboard Design
B11 Breadboard Performance Test
B12 Circuit Board Design
B13 Prototype Circuit
B14 Circuit Performance Test
B7
B1
B2
Figure 8.2: Activity map with financial, human, and temporal resources added to each activity
8.2. EVALUATING THE QUALITY OF THE PROJECT PLAN 145
For the most part, Steps 4–6 can be
performed in any order. This means that
after the specific intermediate design
outcomes are identified (Step 3), the team
could begin by allocating a portion of the
overall resources and schedule to
accomplishing the outcome. Within this
limitation of allocated resources and
schedule, the team can then choose
activities and human resources that would
be suitable.
Refinements and adjustments to the plan
If needed, the team can continue to
decompose each subgoal into lower level
subgoals and repeat the Steps 2 through 6
where each subgoal is the subject of
decomposition. It is important to decide
how detailed to make the project plan. The
plan should be (i) detailed enough to guide
the product to the desired state of evolution
with minimal waste, yet (ii) not so detailed
that it removes the assigned individual’s
freedom to operate in the most efficient
and effective way. The next section offers
some suggestions that may help in
deciding how much detail is needed.
Creating a customized project plan is an
iterative process – meaning it is very
unlikely that the first plan created will
match the needs and constraints of the
project. Planning can be effectively
performed in a design iteration cycle
(Section 2.2). The created plan needs to be
evaluated and adjusted until it appropriately
matches the needs and constraints. To
adjust the plan, any one or more of the
steps above are reconsidered and the
impact of an adjustment carried throughout
subsequent steps. The next section, on
plan evaluation, offers some suggestions
that help decide what adjustments might
be needed. Generally, the team should be
confident in higher level plans before
creating more detailed plans.
Once established and in use, the project
plan should be updated as necessary. We
note that this will likely be frequently. By
definition, because the plan is a detailed
activity map, a change in one part of the
map can affect another part. To avoid
unanticipated problems, consider how
subsequent dependent and interdependent
activities are affected by any proposed map
change before making the update.
8.2 Evaluating the quality of the
project plan
To evaluate the quality of a custom
development plan, we recommend that
each of the following questions be
deliberately asked and thoughtfully
answered about the project plan.
Does it have an appropriate level of detail?
This is a difficult — yet critical — question
to answer. For more experienced product
development teams, it is likely that fairly
high level plans are sufficient for the team
to proceed. For less experienced teams,
more detail will be needed simply because
team members lack the experience to
intuitively know what set of activities
effectively lead to accomplishing the
desired outcomes. The plan should contain
just enough detail to result in efficient team
work relatively free from wasted work due
to misunderstanding the scope of the
desired outcomes, the available resources,
or the time constraints.
Does it have realistic times allocated?
It can be very difficult to estimate the time it
will take to carry out an activity —
especially interdependent activities.
Generally activities take two to three times
longer than most people estimate them to
take. This can be very difficult for designers
to deal with as there is always pressure to
complete activities quicker than is
estimated. When deadlines are fixed, the
resources (human or financial) allocated to
an activity, the scope of the activity, or both
need to be adjusted (see Project Objective
Statement in the Development Reference).
Does it have realistic costs allocated?
Like time estimates, cost estimates are also
difficult to establish. For many product
development activities, these costs have to
do with things such as: material costs for
146 CHAPTER 8. CUSTOMIZING THE PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT PROCESS
prototypes, computing time with super
computers, test lab fees, payments made
to interviewees or focus groups and so on.
In each of these cases, estimates can be
made using experience, or speaking about
the estimates with suppliers involved.
These costs generally don’t include the cost
of human resources, but there would be
nothing wrong with including it if desired.
Does it have appropriate approvals to
minimize risk?
Thinking about what might not go well
during the process of evolving the product
from its initial state of evolution to the final
desired state is a valuable activity. The
custom plan will be most successful when
it is focused on creating approved designs
as opposed to just any design. To that end,
establishing the appropriate approvals is
essential. For any industry there is
generally a set of required approvals or
standards that must be met, such as the
UL 94 flame retardancy standard that
exists for most consumer electronics. Be
sure to understand the required approvals
and standards that must be met for your
specific project. These are sometimes
unspoken because they are so commonly
understood and therefore assumed.
Does it capitalize on the strengths of the
people assigned?
Remember that there are often various
ways to accomplish the intermediate
outcomes of a project. The plan should
reflect activities the team is good at, or
enjoys doing. If the plan requires an
outcome the team is not capable of
achieving alone, the plan should be
coordinated with entities outside of the
team such as a supplier. Also, within the
team, the activities should be distributed
such that the burden is appropriately
shared and that individuals and teams are
asked to carry out activities that align with
their skills and interests.
Is it useful?
The most important part of evaluating any
plan is to ask if the plan is useful in helping
the team know what needs to be done, by
what time, and with what resources. One
indication of this is if the team uses and
updates the plan regularly. Generally the
creation of the plan will be largely driven by
one individual on the team, such as the
team leader. It’s our belief that if the one
creating the plan is thoughtful about its
creation and diligent in updating and
emphasizing of the plan, the plan will
indeed be of great use to the team.
8.3 Using the customized
project plan
The custom project plan represents what
the product development team will do to
advance the design through the stages of
development, but it does not represent how
they will do it. For example, imagine two
product development teams with identical
project plans for evolving two products for
the same market. How the team progresses
through the map — with what level of care
and with how much enthusiasm — has a
large impact on the cost and quality of the
product development effort.
In order to ensure that the resulting
product is both desirable and transferable,
the project should be both well planned
and well managed.
In this section, we describe project
planning and management as the two
halves to the common maxim “Plan your
work, then work your plan.” The first half is
accomplished through project planning;
the second, through project management.
Without project planning, the approach for
transitioning the design through the stages
of development is not clearly defined. This
makes it difficult, if not impossible, for all
team members to pull together to
accomplish the project goals. Without
project management, there is no guarantee
that the team activities will be coordinated
to achieve the plan. Instead, the project
may end up at an entirely different place or
take significantly longer than planned for.
We now discuss both Project Planning and
Project Management in more detail.
8.3. USING THE CUSTOMIZED PROJECT PLAN 147
Project planning
The goal of project planning is to
completely define the whole activity map in
the context of the product and project
needs, development resources, and
schedule implications of the project. This
typically includes defining the following:
• Scope
– Starting state
– Ending state
– Breadth of development project
• Schedule
– Calendar time available to
complete the project
– Milestones between the start and
end
• Resources
– Available money
– Available equipment, tools,
software, etc.
– Available people
– Stakeholders
– Team members
– Approvers
• Tradeoff criteria
– Some understanding of what will
most likely be adjusted in the
event of unforeseen difficulties.
Do we adjust the ending state of
the project (scope), the amount
of resources allocated
(resources), or the amount of
calendar time
allocated(schedule)?
The top-level project plan should be
approved by the client. Once it is approved,
the team can move ahead more confidently,
knowing the client has some ownership in
the plan. Any changes to the plan should
be openly discussed and validated by the
client. The project plan will generally
include a project contract and schedule.
Project management
The goal of project management is to
ensure that the project plan is followed, or
that any necessary deviations from the plan
are carefully and thoughtfully executed. A
secondary goal of project management is to
be able to give an accurate status update at
any time. Status should include project
state, resources used and remaining, and
time state (ahead of schedule, on
schedule, or behind schedule).
In general, there is no formal test or
validation of project management. On a
regular basis however, the current
performance of the team should be
compared with the planned performance.
In many cases, there is no formal
deliverable associated with project
management. But an accounting of the
project status should be tracked by the
team for self-evaluation, and reported to
the client on a regular basis.
Useful tools for project planning and
management
Gantt charts, activity maps, critical path
identification, PERT charts, work
breakdown structure, project planning
software.
Things to watch out for
Avoiding planning
At the beginning of the project, it feels
like not enough is known to produce a
good plan. It can be tempting to wait
until more is known. This can lead to a
state of perpetual working, but with no
plan. It is far better to begin with a
tentative plan and then refine it as
more information is obtained.
Perpetual planning
It is possible to get so involved in the
planning process that the team never
moves to a whole-hearted execution of
it. It is vital to move to execution at the
appropriate time. Deciding the
appropriate time is a matter of
judgment.
148 CHAPTER 8. CUSTOMIZING THE PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT PROCESS
Ignoring the plan
For some teams, the plan can
unfortunately be viewed as a hurdle to
get over, or a hoop to jump through. In
this case, once the plan is created, the
team (sometimes unconsciously)
moves ahead as if they had never
made the plan!
Making the planning documents the goal
The objective of the project is to
change the state of the design. The
plan is a means to this end. In error,
the team can make project
management the goal, instead of the
means to the end.
Pretend plans and statuses
Unfortunately, some will feel the
pressure to tell the stakeholders what
they want to hear, instead of sharing
reality with them. To be effective, the
plan and the status of its execution
must reflect the reality of the project.
We believe that one of the greatest
variables at our disposal in developing a
product is the product development
process itself. To that end, we have
presented a 6-step method for creating a
customized product development process
and have shown how it can be more fully
detailed into a unique project plan.
8.4 Human powered drill
example
Let us now examine how the customization
process unfolded — at the onset of the
product development process — for the
human powered drill. We note that as
development continued for this project, the
plan presented here became more and
more detailed as more and more became
known about the selected architecture and
the unique subsystem engineering
challenges.
Step 1 (example): Establish the project
scope for the human powered drill
Through thoughtful discussion with the
client, the team gathered essential scope
information, which they crafted into the
following project objective statement:
Design, build, and test a human-powered
drill that reaches underground potable
water at depths of 250 ft in all soil types by
March 25, 2011 with a prototyping budget
of $2,800 USD and for less than 1,700
man hours of development.
Because the team needed to produce a
complete system for field testing, and
recognizing that some work had already
been done, the team bracketed the
development to be from the middle of
opportunity development to the end of the
system refinement stage of product
development. The scope of development
for the drill is illustrated in Figure 8.1 and a
set of high level development milestones is
provided in Table 8.1.
Step 2 (example): Articulate specific
end-of-stage outcomes for the human
powered drill
From Step 1, the team knew that it would
transition the design through the first four
stages of development. Using Tables 4.1,
5.1, 6.1, 7.1, the team articulated — as
specifically as it could given the novelty of
the product — the specific end-of-stage
outcomes for the human powered drill.
Table 8.2 shows the team’s result for
Step 2.
Step 3 (example): Identify specific
intermediate design outcomes for the
human powered drill
As the project started, the team identified a
few intermediate design outcomes that
would help it achieve the end-of-stage
outcomes. Later, as more become known
about the drill, additional specific
intermediate design outcomes were
identified and added to the plan.
For the opportunity development stage, to
be able to acquire a deep understanding of
the product expectations, the team
identified a few specific outcomes to
pursue: (i) understanding WHOlives.org’s
8.4. HUMAN POWERED DRILL EXAMPLE 149
Development Milestone Target Date
Opportunity development stage complete 30 Sep 2010
Concept development stage complete 30 Nov 2010
Subsystem engineering stage complete 31 Jan 2011
System refinement stage complete 25 Mar 2011
Final, pre Tanzania, design review 15 Apr 2011
Field testing in Tanzania 15 May 2011
Table 8.1: Development
milestones for the humanpowered
water well drill
project.
wishes for the project, (ii) a summary of
information gained from well driller
interviews, (iii) a summary of information
gained from internet research, and (iv) a
summary of information gained from
benchmarking other competitive drills.
For the concept development stage, the
team decided that they needed an
understanding of operator fatigue (outcome
2 in the concept development stage of
Figure 8.3), labor ergonomics (outcome 3),
rate of cuttings removal (4), chip settling in
a slurry pond (5), pump pressure (6),
mechanical advantage (7), and
manufacturing cost (8). Low-cost
evaluations of many prototypes were
chosen to achieve outcomes 2 through 5.
Low-cost analytical models were chosen to
achieve outcomes 6 and 7, and simple
cost-estimating models were chosen to
achieve outcome 8.
For the subsystem engineering stage, the
team chose to have each subsystem tested
thoroughly and under harsh conditions —
even though the team did not know what
those subsystems would be when they
identified this intermediate outcome. The
team hoped that it could use the results
from each test as a way to identify
problems and push to correct them before
the next drilling test. The subsystem tests
are represented by compound outcomes
14 and 15 in subsystem engineering in
Figure 8.3.
For system refinement, the team planned
to have the entire drill system tested in
Utah. They also planned to have the entire
drill system tested in Tanzania. These tests
are compound outcomes 5 and 10 in
system refinement in Figure 8.3.
Step 4 (example): Choose design
activities that lead to the outcomes for
the human powered drill
For each outcome, one or more design
activities is chosen to lead to the outcome.
For the outcomes listed in Step 3, the team
decides to do the following:
For the opportunity development stage: (i)
interview the client (WHOlives.org), (ii) craft
and revise the project objective statement,
(iii) interview well drillers, (iv) do internet
research, (v) benchmark competitive
products, and (vi)
discuss/brainstorm/establish product
expectations based on interviews, internet,
and benchmarking data.
For the concept development stage: (i)
create and test a low-fidelity prototype to
predict user fatigue, (ii) create and test a
low-fidelity ergonomics prototype, (iii)
create a simple test to measure rate of dirt
removal and run the test, (iv) create and
test a chip settling prototype, (v) create a
predictive measure of mechanical
advantage, (vi) develop a predictive model
of required pump horse power, and (vii)
create a preliminary cost model. These
activities are shown a B–H, respectively, in
Figure 8.3.
For the subsystem engineering stage: (i)
test each subsystem under harsh
conditions to expose weakness, (ii) refine
each subsystem to strengthen weaknesses
identified during tests, and (iii) retest each
subsystem to prove it has been
strengthened.
For the system refinement stage: (i) test the
entire integrated system in Utah, and (ii)
test the entire integrated system in
Tanzania.
150 CHAPTER 8. CUSTOMIZING THE PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT PROCESS
Table 8.2: Specific end-of-stage outcomes for human powered drill.
Opportunity Development:
Requirements (required content at the end of stage):
Market requirements, performance measures, requirement-measure relationships, and ideal values (sections A-D) of the human powered Tests (required content):
None
Design (required content):
None
Validation for approval:
Do the ideal values seem reasonable to WHOlives.org (for better or for worse, WHOlives.org was chosen as the market
representative for the human powered drill project)? Does WHOlives.org know of any missing performance measures
or market requirements that are not captured in the requirements matrix? Does WHOlives.org believe the importance
values are correct?
Concept Development:
Requirements (required content at the end of stage):
Target values for the drill performance in the system-level requirements matrix. Sections A-D and target values for
subsystem requirements matrices.
Tests (required content):
Modeling methods used to predict performance of the drill concept and test methods for prototypes used to measure
performance of the drill concept.
Design (required content):
Overall concept for the drill. Decomposition of drill into subsystems. Interfaces between subsystems.
Validation for approval:
Predicted and measured performance of the drill concept is consistent with the established target values. WHOlives.org
is happy with the concept as expressed in the prototypes and sketches.
Subsystem Engineering:
Requirements (required content at the end of stage):
Predicted and measured performance values in the drill’s subsystems requirements matrices. Predicted performance
values of the drill in the system-level requirements matrix.
Tests (required content):
Updated methods used to predict and measure the drill and subsystem performance.
Design (required content):
Design for each of the drill’s subsystems. This will include a bill of materials, engineering drawings of custom parts,
purchasing specifications for off the shelf parts, system assembly instructions, piping diagram for cutting fluid.
Validation for approval:
Does the measured performance meet or exceed the target performance? It it within the acceptable limits? Where
possible WHOlives.org will critique prototypes and performance data resulting from this stage.
System Refinement:
Requirements (required content at the end of stage):
Measured drill performance values in the requirements matrix. Refinements to predicted and measured performance
values for the drill’s subsystems in the subsystem matrices.
Tests (required content):
Updated methods used to predict and measure the drill and subsystem performance.
Design (required content):
Refined design for the entire drill.
Validation for approval:
Does the measured performance meet or exceed the target performance? Does WHOlives.org and other market representatives
in Tanzania find the product desirable?
8.4. HUMAN POWERED DRILL EXAMPLE 151
CONCEPT
I
II
III
IV
Figure 8.3: Customized activity map for human powered drill, reflecting specific intermediate design outcomes for the drill.
152 CHAPTER 8. CUSTOMIZING THE PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT PROCESS
Once chosen, each of these activities can
be represented in the design activity map.
For readability (based on the constraints of
a physical book layout), we show this for
only the opportunity development stage.
The activity map is shown in Figure 8.4,
along with the resource allocation from
Step 5.
Step 5 (example): Allocate resources to
each design activity for the human
powered drill
For each chosen activity in the activity
map, resources are allocated to its
completion. This includes human,
financial, and temporal resources.
Figure 8.4 shows the result of this step for
the opportunity development stage. Notice
that stage completion date from Table 8.1
has been included in the figure. This is to
facilitate Step 6.
Step 6 (example): Add time estimates
and extract the project schedule for the
human powered drill
A project schedule for the entire project
can be extracted once resources have been
allocated to all the activities in the activity
map. Critical path analysis (see the
Development Reference) can be used to do
this. For the activity map shown in
Figure 8.4, the critical path analysis
indicates that all activities except interview
well drillers are on the critical path. This
means that (based on the allocated time
resources) no activity, except interview well
drillers, can be delayed without
consequently delaying the 30 September
2010 milestone. The extracted schedule is
shown in Table 8.3.
Discussion
Various observations can be made about
this example that may help you as you
create a custom project plan for the first
time.
• The resulting plan is unique to the
project. Figure 8.3 reflects specific
outcomes and activities that apply only
to the drill. Also Figure 8.3 conveys
the fact that the human powered drill
project only covered the first four
stages of development.
• The plan evolves as more information
is gained. In this example, we chose to
describe the custom plan as it existed
very early on for the team — at the
onset of the product development
process. As a result, the plan is
somewhat specific but still very
generic. The plan will evolve as the
requirements, tests, and the design
evolves. As a result, it’s OK that the
plan be a detailed plan in the near
future, and a less detailed plan in the
distant future.
• There are various acceptable plans.
Numerous plans could have been
created to achieve the outcomes. Any
alternative choice for the intermediate
design outcomes, the activity, the
estimated duration, the finances
allocated, or the person assigned to
lead the activity would constitute a
different plan. Various acceptable
plans can result from the flexibility
available.
• There are many unacceptable plans.
While there are various acceptable
plans, we must also recognize that
there are many unacceptable plans
that will not lead to meeting the design
outcomes. For example, choosing to
interview the client for the first time
only after the performance
expectations have been
discussed/brainstormed/established
by the team would be a mistake since
the performance expectations need to
reflect the expectations of the client
and other stakeholders.
• The best plan will have the following
characteristics. It will:
– Produce the desired outcomes
while simultaneously meeting the
desired budget and milestone
goals.
– Make the best use of product
development resources (human,
financial, and temporal).
Figure 8.4: Resource allocation to the human powered drill project (opportunity development stage only)
Activity Scheduled
Start Date
Required
Completion Date
A. Interview WHOlives.org 01 Sep 2010 03 Sep 2010
B. Craft and revise project objective statement 07 Sep 2010 13 Sep 2010
C. Interview well drillers 14 Sep 2010 20 Sep 2010
D. Do internet research 14 Sep 2010 20 Sep 2010
E. Benchmark competitive products 14 Sep 2010 20 Sep 2010
F. Discuss/brainstorm/establish product expectations 21 Sep 2010 29 Sep 2010
Table 8.3: Development
schedule for the humanpowered
drill (opportunity
development stage only).
– Facilitate a common
understanding (among team
members) of specific design
activities, their outcomes and
relationships.
– Be detailed enough to guide the
product development process,
yet flexible enough to allow
individuals to apply their
individual strengths to the
project.
8.5 Summary
Every project needs its own custom product
development plan. The team’s opportunity
to construct that plan in such a way that
maximizes efficiency and effectiveness
means that the product development
process itself is one of the greatest
variables at their disposal.
Six steps can be followed to develop a
custom plan for any specific project. Those
steps are (1) establish the project scope,
(2) articulate specific end-of-stage
outcomes, (3) identify specific intermediate
design outcomes, (4) choose design
activities that lead to the outcomes, (5)
allocate resources to the each design
activity, and (6) add time estimates and
extract the project schedule.
Project plans needs to be made and
managed. Project plans must have an
appropriate level of detail, have realistic
154 CHAPTER 8. CUSTOMIZING THE PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT PROCESS
timeframes, have realistic costs, have
appropriate approvals to minimize risk,
capitalize on the strengths of the team, and
be useful for managing the work on the
project.
Key risks of project planning include
avoiding planning, perpetual planning,
ignoring the plan, making planning (rather
than evolving the product) the goal, and
making pretend plans and statuses.
8.6 Exercises
Test your knowledge
T8-1 List the steps in the process for
customizing the project plan.
T8-2 List six questions that can be asked
to evaluate the quality of a
customized project plan.
T8-3 List five potential pitfalls in project
planning and management.
T8-4 List the three major elements of a
project plan that may need to be
adjusted when unforeseen difficulties
arise.
Apply your understanding
A8-1 Give an example of a project where
you underestimated the time
required for completion. What is the
approximate ratio of the actual time
to the estimated time.
a) What criteria would you expect
to use when assigning human
resources to particular design
activities?
b) What criteria would you expect
to use when assigning financial
resources to particular design
activities?
c) In general, how do you expect
to know when a design activity
is complete?
A8-2 Consider a development project you
are working on now.
a) What stages of development
does your project cover?
b) What stage of development is it
currently in?
c) What is the next development
milestone?
d) How much time and money do
you expect it will take to
advance the design to the next
milestone? Do you have enough
time and money available to
reach the milestone?
A8-3 Describe the difference between a
customized product development
process and a customized product
development plan.
A8-4 The order of steps 4-6 of the process
for customizing a product
development plan is interchangeable.
How would your thinking differ if you
completed these steps in the order
6-5-4 instead of 4-5-6?
A8-5 Using the critical path method, find
the critical path for the activity map
shown in Figure 8.2.
